.he                                Appendix A5 - ZMAC Error Messages
.fo                                                              # 
.TC Appendix A5 - Error Messages.................#
                       ZMAÃ ERROÒ MESSAGES


NOÎ-FATAÌ ERRORS„ arå identifieä iî thå PRÎ filå anä oî thå 
consolå bù onå oæ thå followinç erroò codes‹ aó thå firsô 
characteò iî thå line® Iæ thå erroò loç filå ió enabled¬ thå samå 
erroò codå wilì alsï bå thå firsô entrù iî thå linå iî thå file® 
Statemenô lineó witè erroró wilì usuallù noô generatå valiä 
objecô code® Aî attempô tï Loaä (witè MLOAD© oò Linë aî objecô 
filå foò whicè erroò messageó havå beeî issueä ió verù likelù tï 
eliciô furtheò complaintó froí thå loader/linkeò anä ió almosô 
certaiî tï producå aî unusablå .COÍ oò binarù file.

Erroò Codå               Whaô iô Means:

.pm 1
.lm 16
     A     Argumenô Error® Aî invaliä argumenô oò expressioî waó 
               encountereä iî thå Operanä field.

     B     Balancå Error® IF¬ ELSE¬ anä ENDIÆ statementó arå noô 
               matcheä oò á MACRÏ ¯ ENDÍ paiò ió noô matched® 
               Looë foò á placå wherå onå oæ theså elementó ió 
               missing.

     C     Characteò error® Á characteò (sucè aó á controì 
               character© ió presenô wherå iô ió noô allowed.

     D     Duplicatå symboì error® Onlù thoså occurrenceó afteò 
               thå firsô arå markeä aó aî error® Changå thå namå 
               foò thå seconä occurrencå tï resolvå thå conflict.

     E     Expressioî error® Thå expressioî iî thå operanä fielä 
               cannoô bå computed® Seå thå chapteò titleä 
               'Expressions§ iæ thå causå ió noô obvious.

     I     Inserô error® Thå specifieä INCLUDÅ filå cannoô bå 
               founä oò thå alloweä nestinç leveì haó beeî 
               exceeded.

.cp 4
     K     Keyworä error® Á registeò namå haó beeî useä iî thå 
               LABEÌ fielä anä wilì causå ambiguitù iæ useä iî 
               thå operanä fielä aó aî argument.

     M     Mode error® Aî impropeò addressinç modå occurred® 
               Checë foò aî expressioî thaô useó aî Externaì iî 
               aî illegaì context.

     O     Opcodå error® Therå ió somethinç iî thå Opcodå fielä 
               thaô ió noô recognized® Looë foò á missinç taâ oò 
               otheò formaô probleí iæ iô isn'ô jusô á typo.

.cp 7Š     P     Phaså error® Á labeì haó á differenô valuå iî pasó ² 
               thaî iô haä iî pasó 1® Á MACLIÂ-includeä filå maù 
               contaiî codå generatinç statementó iî á pasó ± 
               onlù processinç mode® Conditionaì (IF...ENDIF© 
               codå whicè assembleó durinç onlù onå oæ thå twï 
               passeó maù alsï bå tï blame.

.cp 6
     S     The famouó SYNTAØ error® Thå statemenô ió ilì-formeä 
               anä ió noô recognizablå tï thå assembler® Looë foò 
               delimiteró thaô arå ouô oæ placå anä foò 
               characteró thaô arå invaliä iî thå intendeä 
               context.

.cp 5
     T     Too manù COMMOÎ blockó havå beeî defined® Onlù 1² 
               commoî blockó arå alloweä iî additioî tï /BLANK¯ 
               oò uî-nameä Common® You'lì havå tï deletå thoså iî 
               excess.

     U     Undefineä symbol® Á symboì iî thå operanä fielä haó 
               neveò beeî defined® Checë foò á spellinç oò 
               typographicaì erroò iî thå symboì name.

.cp 7
     V     Valuå error® Aî argumenô iî thå operanä fielä ió ouô 
               oæ itó alloweä range® Thå mosô commoî causå ió á 
               relativå jumğ tï á targeô thaô ió toï faò away» 
               diä yoõ inserô somå ne÷ codå betweeî thå two¿ 
               Displacemenô argumentó foò thå IØ anä IÙ registeró 
               caî alsï eliciô thió error.

     W     Warning® Therå ió somethinç questionablå abouô thå 
               currenô statement® Thió messagå occuró foò HD6418° 
               oò Z18° instructionó wheî thå .Z8° pseudï-oğ ió iî 
               effect.
.lm 1
.pm 0
.paŠ                        ZMAÃ FATAÌ ERRORS

FATAÌ ERRORS„ causå thå assemblù tï bå aborteä withouô generatioî 
oæ aî objecô module® Thå erroò loç file¬ iæ enabled¬ IÓ generateä 
anä containó á recorä oæ erroró uğ tï thå Fataì One® Fataì Erroró 
causå aî aborô becauså thå assembleò ió lackinç vitaì informatioî 
oò resourceó tï continuå oò becauså á controì structurå likå aî 
IÆ clauså oò á MACRÏ ió incomplete® Onå oæ thå followinç messageó 
wilì bå senô tï thå consolå wheî á fataì erroò occurs.

<FN>.<TYP¾ NOÔ FOUND

Thå filespeã iî thå commanä linå oò iî aî INCLUDÅ statemenô 
cannoô bå found® Checë foò spellinç erroró oò wronç D/Õ speã iî 
eitheò case® Iæ youò commanä linå ió compleø anä á gooä candidatå 
foò typos¬ consideò makinç aî aliaó oò submiô filå tï invokå thå 
assembly.

INVALIÄ OPTIOÎ SPECIFICATION

Onå oò morå oæ thå commanä linå optionó ió perceiveä aó invalid® 
Onå causå ió forgettinç tï separatå thå optionó witè commaó oò 
spaces.

.cp 7
MORÅ THAÎ ¸ IÆ LEVELÓ PENDING....

Diä yoõ leavå ouô aî ENDIF¿ Thå linå numbeò reporteä ió thaô 
wherå thå nintè nesteä IÆ clauså starts® Onlù ¸ nestinç leveló 
arå provided® Youò codå wilì bå mucè morå readablå iæ nestinç 
leveló dï noô exceeä ¶ oò · levels.

UNTERMINATEÄ IF!

Thå enä oæ thå filå haó beeî reacheä withouô findinç á terminaì 
ENDIF® Afteò verifyinç thaô thå ENDIÆ ió reallù there¬ looë foò 
otheò noî-fataì erroò messageó thaô maù indicatå codå thaô waó 
neveò produced.

.CP 10
MEMORÙ FULL....

Therå ió nï rooí lefô foò thå assembleró internaì tables® Yoõ caî 
makå morå spacå bù a© avoidinç uså oæ thå PRÎ file¬ anä b© uså 
ZCNFÇ tï reducå filå buffeò sizeó tï thå barå minimum® Thå onlù 
otheò recourså ió tï breaë thå sourcå filå uğ intï smalleò fileó 
whicè wilì lateò bå combineä bù thå linker® Don'ô bå misleä intï 
tryinç INCLUDÅ files¡ Sourcå witè INcludeä fileó ió logicallù thå 
samå aó iæ thå thå fileó werå physicallù present.

UNTERMINATEÄ MACRO.....

Thå ENDÍ statemenô ió missinç froí á MACRÏ definition¬ oò aî 
erranô IÆ clauså haó causeä thå ENDÍ tï bå ignored.

.cp 7ŠLOCAÌ LABEÌ LIMIÔ EXCEEDED

Allowancå ió madå foò á granä totaì oæ 9,99¹ locaì labeló foò 
macros® Looë foò wayó tï simplifù thå macroó tï avoiä pushinç thå 
limit® Alsï looë foò wayó tï breaë thå prograí uğ intï linkeä 
moduleó tï avoiä runninç ouô oæ memory!

.cp 6
MACRÏ NESTEÄ PASÔ 1¶ LEVELS....

ZMAÃ provideó foò nestinç oæ macroó tï á maximuí oæ 1¶ levels® 
There'ó probablù aî easieò waù tï codå thå functioî iæ yoõ arå 
usinç thaô manù levels!

MACRÏ DEFINITIOÎ INSIDÅ AÎ INLINÅ MACRO....

Macroó maù noô bå defineä withiî thå inlinå macrosº REPT¬ IRPC¬ 
anä IRP.

.he                 Appendix A5 - ZML Error Messages
.paŠ                     ZMÌ ERROÒ MESSAGES


Can'ô finä filå <filespec>

Checë thå directorù iî thå filespec® Ió thå filå reallù there¿ Á 
'typo§ iî thå filenamå ió á commoî causå foò thió error.

Invaliä optioî specification!

Thå linkeò haó á probleí parsinç thå commanä line® Iæ therå ió nï 
mistakå (á typo¬ foò example© iî thå option¬ theî perhapó therå 
ió á missinç delimiter.

Sourcå filespeã erroò ­ wildcarä oò baä DIR:!

1)Wildcardó arå noô recognizeä iî filenames.
2)Ió thå DUº oò DIRº portioî oæ thå filespeã correct?

<filespec¾ ió aî invaliä REÌ file!

Onå oæ thå sourcå fileó oî thå commanä linå ió noô á REÌ filå iî 
thå formaô thaô thå linkeò recognizes® Diä yoõ leavå ouô á 
delimiteò iî thå commanä line¿ Wronç filå specified?

Memorù full!

Thå linë procesó cannoô bå completeä becauså thå binarù imagå 
wilì noô fiô iî availablå memorù (TPÁ space)® Trù reducinç thå 
numbeò oæ globaì symboló bù combininç multiplå REÌ files¬ oò 
rearranginç thå sourcå tï producå severaì smalleò ruî-timå codå 
moduleó whicè caî bå independentlù loaded® Iæ yoõ arå usinç á 
"fulì-up¢ ZCPR³ operatinç system¬ yoõ caî gaiî somå extrá rooí bù 
installinç aî operatinç systeí witè mosô systeí moduleó excluded.

.cp 4
Reaä error!

Therå ió somethinç wronç witè á filå whicè preventó iô froí beinç 
properlù read® Trù reassembly¬ preferablù froí bacë-uğ files.

Multiplå maiî modules!

Checë thå ENÄ statemenô oî eacè oæ youò modules® Thå argumenô 
followinç ENÄ specifieó aî obligatorù startinç address¬ anä aô 
leasô twï oæ thå moduleó contaiî sucè á specification® Deletå thå 
one(s© thaô arå inappropriatå anä reassemble® Thå linkeò haó nï 
waù oæ choosinç whicè onå tï use.

Librarù searcè limiô exceeded!

Nï morå thaî teî librarieó caî bå specifieä iî assembler.REQUESÔ 
statements® Iæ youò maiî sourcå filå ió innocent¬ looë 
in.INCLUDÅ fileó foò librarù requestó thaô yoõ maù havå 
overlooked.
ŠUndefineä symbols

Symboì name(s© listeä havå beeî referenceä viá EXTERNAÌ iî onå oò 
morå oæ thå moduleó buô arå nowherå declareä PUBLIÃ oò GLOBAL® Á 
commoî causå foò thió erroò ió failurå tï includå á REÌ formaô 
librarù iî thå invokinç commanä line® Á seconä causå ió thå 
inclusioî oæ unreferenceä externaló iî onå oæ thå assemblù sourcå 
files® ZMAÃ caî bå configureä tï ignorå unreferenceä externals® 
Otherwise¬ requireó reassemblù oæ thå module(s© containinç thå 
nameó afteò addinç appropriatå PUBLIÃ declarations.

Duplicatå symbols

Symboì names(s© listeä havå beeî madå PUBLIÃ iî morå thaî onå oæ 
thå moduleó beinç linked® You'lì havå tï reassemblå aô leasô onå 
oæ thå moduleó witè duplicateä nameó changeä oò removeä froí thå 
lisô oæ PUBLIÃ oò GLOBAÌ declarations.

***Overlappinç segments***

Thió messagå typicallù occuró wheî yoõ havå assigneä thå loaä 
addresó oæ onå oò morå segmentó witè commanä linå options® Makå 
surå yoõ havå stateä thå addresseó accuratelù anä iî HEX.

.CP 6
Internaì Error

Thió messagå shoulä neveò occur® Iæ iô does¬ pleaså documenô thå 
circumstanceó anä reporô them® Uså thå registration/buç reporô 
forí (oò á copy© iî thió manual.
.paŠ